0.4 roadmap (#1906)
Napari/napari: docs/source/developers/ROADMAP_0_4.md

# Roadmap

> ## For 0.4.* series of releases - November 2020

Reviewer: January 2021?

Author: well strictly speaking the first 0.4 release was back then and the doc started in november. i think it's ok. we probably shouldn't let it sit as long next time, but i'd probably leave as is now

Reviewer: eh, still feels like backdating a contract, but 🤷. Happy to leave it be.

The napari roadmap captures current development priorities within the project and aims to guide for napari core developers, to encourage and inspire contributors, and to provide insights to external developers who are interested in building for the napari ecosystem. For more details on what this document is and is not, see the [about this document section](#about-this-document).

The [mission](MISSION_AND_VALUES.md#our-mission) of napari is to be a foundational multi-dimensional image viewer for Python and provide graphical user interface (GUI) access to image analysis tools from the Scientific Python ecosystem for scientists across domains and levels of coding experience. To work towards this mission, we have set the following three high-level priorities to guide us over the upcoming months:

- Make the **data viewing and annotation** capabilities **bug-free, fast, and delightful to use**.

> - Support **functional and interactive** plugins that allow for image analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Support **functional and interactive** plugins that enable complete image analysis workflows.
```

> - Add accessible documentation, tutorials, and demos.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add accessible **documentation**, tutorials, and demos.
```

> You can read more about how this roadmap builds on and continues the work in our `0.3` series of releases in our [0.3 lookback section](#lookback-at-the-0.3-roadmap). We're continuing to prioritize the robustness and polish of the core viewer to ensure that plugin development happens against a solid foundation, and because we believe that looking at and annotating your data should be a bug free and delighful experience, regardless of how large it is. We want to build on the success of our reader / writer plugins to provide the ability to add functional and interactive plugins and further empower a lot of the great work being built ontop of napari.

Reviewer: The link probably needs updating

Author: updated

## Make the data viewing and annotation capabilities bug-free, fast, and delightful to use

- ...

> - **Better support for viewing big datasets**. Currently, napari is fast when viewing on-disk datasets that can be naturally sliced along one axis (e.g. a time series) *and where loading one slice is fast*. However, when the loading is slow, the napari UI itself becomes slow, sometimes to the point of being unusable. We now have experimental support for asyncronous rendering for our images, and are in the process of adding support for an octree to better support multiscale tiled data for both 2D and 3D rendering.

Reviewer: Both of these are now implemented but as opt-in, only programmatically. I would outline two priorities here:
- add persistent settings and use those to allow anyone to use these features, even in the bundled app
- bring the features out of experimental and into mainline napari

Author: can you take this one

- Add **physical coordinates**. We now have a world coordinate system and transforms that can move between data coordinates, world coordinates, and the canvas where things are rendered; however, we still don't have a concept of phyiscal units. See [#1701](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/1701) for additional discussion.

- Add **linked multi-canvas support** ([#760](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/760)) to allow orthogonal views, or linked views of two datasets, for example to select keypoints for image alignment, or simultaneous 2D slices with 3D rendering.

- Add **layer groups** [#970](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/970), which allow operating on many layers simultaneously making the viewer easier to use for multispectral or multimodal data, or, in the context of multiple canvases, where one wants to assign different groups to different canvases.

> - Complete **serialization of the viewer** [#851](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/851) to enable sharing the entire viewer state, see [#1875](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/1875) too.

Reviewer: I don't love this as a priority on its own — it'd be good to mention what this enables in terms of usage and features, e.g. remote viewer, sharing of viewers between different users, deep linking, animation interpolating all attributes of the viewer...

Author: hmm that's fair. I do want to capture this feedback too https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/1906#issuecomment-730779928

Author: open to ideas/ suggestions, maybe you can take a pass?

> - Support for generating **animations** [#780](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/780).

Reviewer: maybe link to your repo here? Or remove altogether — maybe point to your repo in the retrospective?

Author: ok, maybe we cut here and I add link to my repo in retro

Author: done

- Improved **error handling and bug reporting**, see [#1090](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/1090) for details.

> - Support for persistent settings [#1183](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/1183) to allow **saving of preferences** between launches of the viewer.

Reviewer: This should be bumped up, and we should mention that it is critical to give users early access to experimental features.

Author: yes agreed, can you take

- Improve the **user interface and design** of the viewer to make it easier to use. We have conducted a product heuristics analysis to [identify design and usability issues](https://github.com/napari/product-heuristics-2020), and will now be working during the 0.4 series of releases to implement them. Also see the [`design` label](https://github.com/napari/napari/labels/design) for more information.

## Support **functional and interactive** plugins that allow for image analysis.

> - Support for functional plugins that take in layers or layer data and operate on them to return new layers or layer data.

Reviewer: Already done. Maybe, strengthen support? It would be nice actually to tie it in with the community, e.g. "0.4.3 brought experimental support for functional plugins. During the 0.4.x series, we aim to work with our community to strengthen that support, identify gaps in functionality, and fill those gaps, either with new plugin types or by modifying the existing plugins architecture to suit developer and user needs."

Author: yes very open to that. i'd like some of the perspective of the doc to still be from everything in 0.4, but should be up to date with where we are now. can you take this one

## Work prioritized for future roadmaps

We’re also planning to prioritized the following work in future roadmaps:

- General support for undo / redo functionality [#474](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/299), a history feature, and macro generation.

- Draggable and resizable layers [#299](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/299) and [#989](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/989).

- Linked 1D plots such as histograms, timeseries, or z-profiles [#823](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/823) and [#675](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/675).

- Support for using napari with remote computation.

- Asynchronous and multiscale support beyond the image layer.

## Lookback at the 0.3 roadmap

Our [0.3 roadmap](ROADMAP_0_3.md) had the following main prioities:

- Make the **data viewing and annotation** capabilities **bug-free and fast**.

- Make a **downloadable application** with reader / writer plugin management.

- Make accessible documentation, tutorials, and demos.

> Overall we made good progress towards these priorites. We now provide cross-platform support for downloadable app that you can install reader and writer plugins into. We added support for world coordinates, we reduced the number of bugs, and we've begun begun to support asynchronous rendering and improve performance. We also had some highlights that weren't on our roadmap including contributions from the community like the Tracks layer. We've added more documentation and tutorials, but a redesign of our website is still in progress. For a detailed lookback at the work that was done during the `0.3` series of releases you can look at comments under the individual bullet items in our [0.3 roadmap](ROADMAP_0_3.md) that we have added as we made this roadmap.

Reviewer: Delete?

Author: yeah, we can cut section

Author: done
